What made Ezra such a sterling example
of faith and trust in God?
And more important, how can you and I
—how can we—
imitate the total reliance
that Ezra put on Jehovah God
and in His Word?
Well, let’s find out.
Let’s examine Ezra chapter 7.
Let’s open our Bibles to Ezra chapter 7,
and we’re going to look at verses 6 and 7.
Now, verse 6, it says:
“Ezra came up from Babylon.”
So that’s where he lived.
Remember, he was
under the Medo-Persian Empire at the time,
and he lived there.
And he was “well-versed in the Law”
and “a skilled copyist.”
But verse 7, it says
that he “went up to Jerusalem
in the seventh year of King Artaxerxes.”
Now, the seventh year of King Artaxerxes
would be the year 468 B.C.E.
So as a reference point,
we have 607 B.C.E.,
when Jerusalem was destroyed;
537 B.C.E., when the Jews returned
to their homeland in Jerusalem;
and 515 B.C.E., when,
under the encouragement
of Haggai and Zechariah,
the Jews rebuilt the temple of Jehovah.
Now, at that time,
Ezra probably wasn’t even born yet.
So he enters into the picture here
in the year 468 B.C.E.
But the question is,
What would have moved Ezra
to want to move to Jerusalem?
He was probably around 30 years old
when he made this move.
And he wanted to advance pure worship,
even that, as it mentions in verse 10,
he wanted “to teach [the] regulations
and judgments in Israel.”
But what would have moved him to do that?
Well, Ezra would have lived
during the time period
of Esther and Mordecai.
And that was the time period
when Haman tried to exterminate the Jews.
Now, that was in the year 484 B.C.E.,
and Ezra was a teenager at that time.
So he would have seen firsthand
how Jehovah defended his people
and how Jehovah strengthened
and cared for his people.
This event
—this national crisis—
would have made an indelible impression,
an imprint,
on that young man’s mind and heart.
And no doubt he said to himself:
‘When I get of age,
‘I want to go to Jerusalem.
I want to be there to help
and advance pure worship.’
So that’s what he decides to do.
However, it wasn’t easy for Ezra
to make this move to Jerusalem,
and that’s where we come to verse 10:
“Ezra had prepared his heart
to consult the Law of Jehovah.”
So to prepare his heart,
what did Ezra have to do?
How did he prepare his heart?
He must have asked himself questions:
‘Why do I want to go to Jerusalem?
‘Is it just to make a name for myself,
or is it to honor Jehovah?
‘How do I feel about going there?
‘How do I feel about leaving
my family and my friends
‘and this comfortable way of life
that I have here in Babylon
‘—I’m going to leave it all behind;
I’m going to move to this distant land
and to live under circumstances
that would be difficult?’
So he’s preparing his heart
by asking himself these questions.
But he was desirous
of putting Jehovah’s work first.
Now, notice here in verse 10, it says
that then he wanted “to consult
the Law of Jehovah.”
That’s why we love Ezra.
He consults the Law of Jehovah.
That was his love;
that was his first priority.
He didn’t consult the arithmetic,
the astronomy,
the history, the chronology,
and the geography of Babylon.
No, it was the Law of Jehovah.
In fact, Ezra had deep respect
for that Law of Jehovah.
He is the one who wrote
First and Second Chronicles.
It shows that he was
a deep student of God’s Word
and familiar with Psalm 119:18.
You can imagine him saying before studying:
“Open my eyes so that I may see clearly
the wonderful things of your law.”
That’s Ezra.
And when we think about him
and how he meditated deeply
on the information that he gathered—
He gathered information about the kings
of Judah and about the priesthood.
That was his interest
—to track the line leading to the Messiah.
But he did more than just gather facts,
he applied what he learned.
It touched his heart.
How do we know?
Notice in verse 10, it said,
after “consult[ing] the Law of Jehovah,”
“and to practice it.”
“To practice it”
—Ezra was ready to act upon what he studied.
What he learned stirred his feelings,
touched his emotions,
and moved him to draw closer to Jehovah God.
That was his whole goal of studying.
And then he acted to help his brothers.
He did move to Jerusalem; he acted.
He did it in spite of the inconveniences
and the problems that he would be facing.
But now let’s look at chapter 8,
verse 22,
just to highlight again
how he was moved by what he read.
It’s just not a fact-finding mission.
In chapter 8, verse 22,
it says here that as he was ready
to leave Babylon
and move to Jerusalem,
in speaking to the king,
he said: “I was ashamed
“to ask the king for soldiers and horsemen
“to protect us
against the enemies along the way,
“[I’m ashamed to do that]
“because we had said to the king:
‘The good hand of our God
“‘is over all those seeking him, . . .
his strength . . . [is] against all those
[who are against] him.’”
“I was ashamed.”
What’s the point?
Well, as he again tracked those Judean kings
(because that’s what
First and Second Chronicles do,
track the Judean kings
leading to the Messiah),
imagine how he meditated when he got to David
or Hezekiah
—185,000 Assyrians killed in one night.
What about Josiah?
What about Asa
—a million Ethiopians killed?
What about Jehoshaphat?
The combined enemies of Moab, Edom,
Ammon, and so forth
came up against Jehoshaphat,
and yet Jehovah defended them.
He had this in his mind,
and that’s why he said:
‘I’m ashamed because of what I’ve studied.
‘No, I don’t need an escort, dear king.
Jehovah is going to be with us.’
So it just shows the same point for us
when we study.
It’s part of our worship.
And we study to draw close to Jehovah God,
not simply to gather facts,
but to allow our attachment to Jehovah God
to get stronger.
For example, the Watchtower  Study.
Yes, we study The Watchtower,
but is it just to find an answer?
Is it that ‘Oh, I need to make a comment’?
That’s not why we study
the Watchtower  magazine.
It’s part of pure worship.
It’s being fed
by “the faithful and discreet slave.”
We read The Watchtower  and we open
the Scriptures to draw close to Jehovah God.
And in the meantime: ‘Yes, I found an answer.
I can make a comment.’
But our primary goal is to feed our hearts.
How do I feel about what I’m reading?
We prepare our hearts.
What is my motive in studying the lesson?
Each time we open up God’s Word,
our attitude should be like Samuel,
who was told to say:
“Speak, Jehovah,
for your servant is listening.”
Ezra also was given
insight and understanding,
and that enabled him
to be a blessing to the nation
as he dug deep into God’s Word.
For example, in chapter 9, verse 2,
he recognized,
when he got there to Jerusalem,
that ‘the holy offspring was being mingled
with the pagan nations.’
The men were marrying these pagan women.
Ezra saw the disastrous consequences:
“You’re going to mingle the holy seed
along with pagan women?
“You’re going to assimilate the whole nation
into a pagan environment?
“You’re going to merge true worship?
“It could vanish from the earth in time
if not careful.
“You wouldn’t be able to locate
the Messiah, the lineage.
“Is he of the line of David?
We don’t know.
Is he of the tribe of Judah?
We don’t know.”
Ezra saw that, and he acted
because of the insight
that Jehovah God gave him.
Now notice chapter 10, verse 1
(because it again gives us insight
into the beauty of Ezra’s personality),
when he did act on it
and got rid of those foreign wives
(chapter 10, verse 1),
his humble confession before Jehovah God
and what happens
when he humbly prays to Jehovah:
“A large crowd of men, women,
and children of [Jerusalem]
gathered around him . . .
[and] were weeping.”
That’s Ezra.
They did not cringe and retreat
before a tyrant.
Rather, they were drawn to a loving shepherd.